Welcome to
Debugging 101! I'm going to give you a very brief into to Visual Studio's Debugger,
and the principles will apply over to Xcode and others. I'm going to show you
how to set a break point and to watch values and then how to use
continue to look around your code and see what it does in between
your watches and break points. That'll all make sense in a sec, when we dive in and see
it work.
OK, so here we are with our slightly problematic loop! Now, I know that some
of you may have spotted the bug in this straight away, but
for those who haven't, I'm going to show you the systematic process of trying to find out
what on earth is going on. So firstly, let's just remind ourselves what the symptom is. I've got a
hidden word of ant, and if I type and, I get correctly 2 bulls.
If I put ape, then I get 1 bull for the a, but
in both cases, I'm getting too many cows. And the question is, why am I getting
too many cows? So, that's what we need to try and
work out. So, here's our logic
and it seems find. Now, a couple of things on style, firstly.
And star sometimes can fix it alone. This for loop
and the if statement, we're both not putting our braces on
new lines. Unreal would have us do this and this, and you may choose
to do that for the for loops. And then again, Unreal's coding standards
would have us do this and this
and this, for the if statements. Now, you may want to do that. Personally, I find that means
I need to go out to a small font, which is going to be harder for you to see. And also, I don't
find it quite as easy to take in. So, I prefer to not do
that and to revert all those changes and to have the code just a little bit tighter.
Certainly my if statements, I'm happy for the fors to be spread out a little bit,
but certainly these ifs in here, I like them to be tight. Now, if this offends you and you want a
consistent style, then you can draw things,
write things how you like right. Bracket wars are pretty vile.
It's irrelevant, the important thing is that you read code like a compiler reads code.
Some people love their brackets there, some love them there. Who cares! I'm going for
this, for now, so that's deviating a little bit from Unreal standards, so don't flame me for that. Now,
the other thing is that, we have used this i and j which is pretty common, but actually,
this may be contributing to our problem. What is i here? Let's be more explicit about what
i is. Firstly, it's in lower case, and we'd normally use upper case. What i is, is it's the
hidden word character or something like that. So, I'm going to call
it hidden word character, or even my hidden word,
MHWCharacter. So, the my hidden
word character is 0 and iterates up. And then, this j thing, what is explicitly
Control, R, Control, R, is the guess
character. Now, I'm making them shorter than full my
hidden word character and guess character, in this case, because otherwise they're going to
split up these statements and make this whole lump of code even harder to read
but I think that this is better. OK, so
now we're being explicit about what our iterators are and what they need to do. We need to think
about what's going wrong. Clearly what's going wrong, in some respects,
is that this BullCowCount.Cows is being incremented too often. This
is the thing that's happening too often, it's the only place that it gets incremented.
So, one way to deal with this is to put in the margins something called a break point. If you
click over on the left here, that will put something called a break point. Put it on the line that's causing the problem,
to start with, and then when you run, instead of Start Without Debugging, let's just
Start Debugging, which is F5 by default. Start Debugging.
Similar tools are available in Xcode and other IDE's, you just have to have a play to get to them.
So, if we Start Debugging now, with this break point in place, what it'll do is it'll
start playing the game. Now, imagine I put in... Don't even imagine, I'm going to
put an and, a n d. You see it doesn't give me a result yet. What Visual Studio
has done is, it's got as far as this break point and stopped, and then, it started
to show me here, under these tabs Auto, Locals, and Watch...
It started to show me, in fact the watches are things I've put in between videos,
which is naughty, so I'm going to clear those. So, you will have Autos, Locals, and
nothing in Watch at the moment. Now the Autos, you can start to see  some of these
values and you can click continue, for it to go all the way through the loop again and start to see
what happens. You can see the cow count getting too high, really early here.
OK, and then it goes back to the running game and we can try ant
again, and now, it'll go and break here. Visual Studio is flashing, you can go back to it.
OK, now you might suggest that if it's getting here too often
and it's getting this bit right, that maybe it's doing this if
statement too often. Because this line here with the bull
increment is working right, but it must be falling through to the cows to often and
to get to the cows it must be doing this if statement too often. So, is there a problem in
this if statement? One thing you can do at this point, once the debugger is running is this.
You can highlight the logic, right-click and say
Add Watch. OK. And what that'll do over on the
Watch list here is, it'll tell you the value of this statement. Now,
if this is working properly and I put the word
abc in, for example, then you would expect
this to go false, some of the time, as it compares the characters right. Because abc
and ant aren't the same, and you would expect to see a mixture of trues and falses. Let's
see if that's what happens! Let's just quit the game, for a moment,
which you can do by saying Stop Debug. There's a little red button. I'll show you that again in a moment.
So, let's run again, put abc, Return,
go over to the Debugger, look here at the Watch list, and just keep clicking
Continue and watch this value. And it
stayed true all the time, the value never deviated from true.
...
So, what I want you to do is squash that bug, using
the little you know of the Debugger. See if you can use either the Debugger or just your
wit and knowledge to work out what the problem is. See if you can fix it, it's pretty
simple. I've steered you in close to where it is, and then, proved
that it now counts bulls and cows correctly. And I'll see you when you're done!
So, hopefully by now you've seen what's going wrong. Let's stop the Debuggers. The
button is there, Shift, F5. Stop Debugging or Debug and Stop
Debugging. So, there's a very very brief intro to the Debugger. What I want you
to do is play with the Debugger a little bit. Really, it's a question of getting a feel for it,
and understand that you can put break points in to stop it executing. If you debug without a
break point, then what it's going to do is just run, and you're not going to see
anything in the Debugger, because it's all going to go past too quick. So, you need to click in the margin to put in a break
point, and just have a play with it. It's a pretty handy tool, and we'll revisit it as need
to. So, what's happening here? I think it's quite clear now that I've changed these
prefixes. I'm looking at the my hidden word character of the Guess, but I'm also
looking at the my hidden word character of the hidden word. Of course, I
should be looking at the Guess character, here,
GChar and the my hidden word character there.
And so, what was happening is we were using the wrong index.
OK, so let's test that hypothesis and put ant,
and we get 3, 0. And if I put and we should get 2, because the a and the d match
ant but the d doesn't. Ah hah! Great!
OK, and that's working! And if I put abc, how many should we get? Well, we
should get a single bull and no cows. And if I put abt
or atn, for instance which is ant backwards, I should get
one bull and two cows and I do. So, it looks like that has
fixed the logic, which is great news! So, there's a brief
introduction to the Debugger, and I hope you will find it useful. Do use it
and try and use it and just explore it and play with it, and we will revisit the Debugger
as we need to, in the future, when we come up with other inevitable bugs. See you soon!